**Satellite and ground observations of NO2 over Indian cities ( Atomic and Molecular Physics Division Center for Astrophysics, Harvard |Smithsonian)**

Nitrogen dioxide (NO2 ) is an air pollutant that can adversely affect human and ecosystem health and serves as a precursor to producing surface ozone (smog) and harmful particulate matter. Its primary source is fossil fuel combustion, with additional contributions from soil emissions, lightning, and biomass burning. Ground based in situ nitrogen dioxide (NO2 ) monitoring can provide accurate observations of surface NO2 with high temporal resolution. However, surface monitors cannot provide extensive spatial coverage and are often sparsely located in remote regions in developing or underdeveloped countries. Conversely, satellite measurements can
provide continuous spatial measurements but retrieve column densities of pollutants throughout the atmospheric column (or the full troposphere for NO2 ), with reduced sensitivity to the surface NO2, which affects human and ecosystem health. This study compares satellite measurements to surface concentrations from ground monitoring network sites in Indian cities. This study is to determine whether weekly or monthly variability in the satellite column reproduces variability in surface concentrations before using satellite observations to quantify long-term trends in air pollution in the targeted cities.

This study leverages the Ozone Monitoring Instrument (OMI) on board the NASA Aura satellite, along with other predictor variables, to estimate daily surface NO2 concentrations over 67 surface monitors in 12 Indian cities in 6 different Indian states, which are then averaged to weekly and monthly aggregates. I sourced the OMI Level 3 gridded data from the new V4.0 data, and relevant explanatory documentation is publicly available from the NASA Goddard Earth Sciences Data and Information Services Center and the ground observation data hosted by Central Pollution Control Board, India.

Average OMI NO 2 is compared to represent ground based surface concentrations of NO2 in targeted cities. This study finds temporal consistency between column and surface NO2 in Indian cities in the states of Delhi, West Bengal, and Maharashtra (R-squared ~ 0.25-0.55). I also find that the NO2 during 2020-2021 has slightly reduced and is likely due to a reduction in the traffic during the COVID pandemic. A drill-down dashboard is built to visualize and filter the information for the roll-up analytics. This study helped visually correlate the OMI NO 2 and surface NO2 in different targeted cities in India.
